# Governance by Adaptocracy

*R&amp;D on a new model of governance called Adaptocracy. Inspired by aspects of [Holacracy](https://www.holacracy.org/how-it-works/), as well as [Sociocracy](http://www.sociocracy.info/), and elements from the Commons and Open concepts.*

Adaptocracy is a governance model built as a [complex adaptive system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complex_adaptive_system), able to adapt and be used at an individual's level, and able as well to form resilient structures.

Chaos is naturally generated by individual paths and freedoms.

Order can emerge and be consolidated from the interactions between agents, the resources, the needs and values that are shared, and alongside the decisions that are made.

This existence at the edge of chaos is reflective of the realities of our world, our societies, and Life itself - complex, dynamic, and yet, somehow, enduring.

---

### Table of Contents
#### I - Open & Responsible Information Flow
    1. Accessibility, usability & inclusion
    2. Data-as-a-commons
    3. Curated tools and processes
    4. Open Intelligence & Documentation
    5. Time well spent
#### II - Lifecaring & Personal Path
    6. Right to fulfillment
    7. Safe and supportive environment
    8. “One for all, all for one”
    9. Duty of care
    10. Self-governance
#### III - Organisation & Equilibrium
    11. Autonomous teams organisation & Roles
    12. Decision making and Divergence resolution protocols
    13. Commons building, equilibrium, responsibility and resilience
    14. Reciprocity agreements
    15. Values, codes and ethics
#### IV - Resources Network
    16. Peering network
    17. Spaces and places
    18. Material resources as a common
    19. Immaterial resources as a common
    20. Sustainability
#### V - "Tiers-Lieux Libres et Open Source" - TILIOS
    21. Social configuration
    22. Common patrimony
    23. Free appropriation
    24. Emancipation through doing
    25. Resilience and modularity

---

### OPEN & RESPONSIBLE INFORMATION FLOW

#### Main description
Creating an open and responsible information flow is a collaborative process. It determines the foundation of how our society is governed, holding us all accountable while giving us the ability to reflect and act with deeper insight. It enables us to deal with the complexity of the world, promoting diplomacy, transparency and equality. When we have access to key information, that isn't overwhelming and is well presented with the ability to use and comprehend it, we are empowered to tackle societal challenges and are less hesitant to contribute.

**1. Accessibility, Usability & Inclusion**
Information is only as good as the design of the interaction we have with it.

By considering these three criterias as critical in any information we produce or transmit, we can tackle both the digital divide and information overload.

**2. Data-as-a-commons**
From data comes information, from information, knowledge, and from knowledge, sometimes comes wisdom - but also power.

With great power comes great responsibility, and that's why we believe data should be seen as a commons if we want both individuals' rights and collective benefits to thrive.

**3. Curated tools and processes**
Our tools and the different ways we use them are parts of who we are as people and as organisations.

Diversified, interconnected toolboxes, digital or not, would allow everyone to tailor their environment and to create bridges between organisations.

**4. Open Intelligence & Documentation**
We believe that a distributed, interconnected network of knowledge and skills is critical to tackling complex challenges.

The empowerment of individuals, projects and society as a whole is about learning and experimenting. The right information in the right hands at the right moment can make changes happen.

**5. Time well spent**
We have the duty to ensure that our information flows, technologies and contents are respectful of our time spent.

By allowing our peers to not be overwhelmed by information overload, we give them a chance to follow their aspirations with less fear and trepidation.


### LIFECARING & PERSONAL PATH
#### Main description
The philosophy of "Lifecaring" is the belief that we should take care of all living things. Our priority is to make sure that each of us have a safe and supportive environment to thrive in, that we are encouraged to be ourselves and are comfortable enough to co-exist with others peacefully who may be different.

Lifecaring means we respect and nurture those around us and that we are each responsible in providing the care and resources required with the relevant tools and expertise available. Another pivotal aspect of this approach is to recognise the importance of an individual's personal path as complimentary, even vital, to the collective. By nurturing our own sense of self, assuring our health physically, mentally and socially, we are more capable and open to authentic participation. 

When we take care of ourselves, we essentially take care of all.

**6. Right to fulfillment**
We often feel that we have to arbitrate between our self-interest and that of the community. In any case, the right to self-fulfillment should be integrated as a variable rather than an opposition to a community's efforts.

It promotes transparency and natural empathy. It desalienates social and internal personalities by recognizing that we are all just humans.

**7. Safe and supportive environment**
A safe and supportive environment is a setting in which everyone can feel socially, emotionally and physically safe and valued.

This is a priority for us, especially when strong emotions and differences are involved.

**8. One for all, all for one**
The need of one individual is not necessarly lesser than the need of the many, and vice-versa.

Ensuring proper support to minority requirements, even if in opposition, ensures connections, resilience and dialogue which are key for the collective evolution.

**9. Duty of care**
The simple human connection of *care* propagates through social networks.

Proactively caring about our own state and that of others is a core component of our governance.

**10. Self-governance**
Self-governance is both a right and a duty. We have the right of choosing who we are and what we do, even in the name of the collective. 

We also have the duty to make sure that we are aware of others' needs and are as autonomous as we can be in our efforts.


### ORGANISATION & EQUILIBRIUM
#### Main description
Inspired by both Holacracy and Sociocracy, the organisation and equilibrium of an adaptive governance means we strive for a balance between the shared nature of the commons and the responsibility of autonomous, self-directed roles. By implementing an optimised onboarding protocol (both human/interpersonal and digital) and the use of reciprocity agreements - strengthened by the diversity of social codes, values and ethics - we can structure a modular living framework that isn't fixed, but resilient and reflective of the evolving community; both emergent in nature and editable in time when required.


**11. Autonomous teams organisation and Roles**
Teams are autonomous in their self-organization. For convenience, roles can be determined for individuals as well as for the team itself.

We just list here some modes of organisations and roles that can be useful toward structuring a team.

**12. Decision making and Divergence resolution protocols**
It is important that our decision processes embrace contexts in all their complexities and are adaptative in nature. 

We hereby provide guidelines on which decision making patterns could be appropriate for a situation, and how divergences can become an opportunity to document and enrich perspectives.

**13. Commons building, equilibrium, responsibility and resilience**
The versatility of projects, individualities, and competition needs to be complemented by a good stability in the commons and clear responsibilities.

Good balance between people, actors, actions and resources allows for a more just and resilient system.

**14. Reciprocity agreements**
A reciprocity agreement is a new model of peer-to-peer contract that incorporates the free expression of the parties, as well as their formal commitments. 

It is born of a need in collaborative environments to bring order to informal and contributory relationships as well as bring chaos to formal and commercial relationships.

**15. Values, codes and ethics**
We believe that behind the words used in charts, practices are what makes ethics really tick.

A diversity of values, codes and ethical frameworks can freely co-exist, be adopted or not, and ultimately be matched together by the real practices behind them.


### RESOURCES NETWORK
#### Main description
Creating a useful and comprehensive resources network means we have to take into account the ability to make each individual feel welcome and capable, while encouraging them to be autonomous. We place much value on the human connection, on both immaterial resources and documentation, to form a well-rounded network to help develop everyone's potential. By using both digital and non-digital tools with thoughtful interface design, we sustain and grow with each individual, project and group.

**16. Peering network**
Being in touch with the right person at the right moment can make all the difference.

We document here what practices we use to ensure that peers can be connected together.

**17. Spaces and places**
The physical places we live in and the spaces we create are key assets for any individual, project or organisation.

An interrelated network of places-as-a-commons could be a solution to allow greater freedom, exposure to diversity, adaptability and specificities whilst avoiding over-competition and siloes.

**18. Material-resources-as-a-commons**
Be it budgets or access to machines, we support an agile and open approach to material resources management in order to reduce waste and improve accessibility and transparency.

The adoption of open policies can maximize the return on public investments and promote a global commons of resources for innovative reuse.

**19. Immaterial-resources-as-a-commons**
Immaterial resources such as knowledge, domain names, computer programs, brands, legal structures and so on are core components of our society.

Knowledge is open if anyone is free to access, use, modify, and share it — subject, at most, to measures that preserve provenance and openness.

**20. Sustainability**
Going forward is good, but not at the cost of tomorrow.

We commit to favor sustainable solutions, and question the human and ecosystemic impact of our choices.

### TILIOS - TIERS LIEUX LIBRES ET OPEN SOURCE
#### Main description
We are part of an integral community of the growing movement of third places in France. Each person that discovers the freedoms of working towards a peaceful coexistence in a constantly evolving environment, learns by doing and learns how to adapt to the various social and physical configurations that arise as a community evolves. 

We enable the proactive nature of ourselves by participating in a resilient and modular community that instills both responsibility and action. We communicate with one another openly about the decisions and changes required in a democratic, open and safe space, both online and off. We learn about reappropriation and how to document and contribute to the commons, mutualising our resources and efforts. An emergent, collective force arises with the idea of sharing responsibilities between diverse networks of care, functional operability and purpose.

**21. Social configuration criteria**
We believe ourself to be a place of plurality (3/5), with a political function (4/5) and that you can experience for yourself (4/5).

We therefore rank ourself a 4/5 on the Social configuration criteria of the TILIOS framework. 

**22. Common patrimony criteria**
We adopt an economy of peace (4/5), have an history of donations (4/5) and are researching and developing an economy of commons (4/5).

We therefore rank ourself a 4/5 on the Social configuration criteria of the TILIOS framework. 

**23. Free appropriation criteria**
We allow communities to meet (4/5), are indomitably hackers (4.5/5) and the experimental  mindset is deeply part of us (4.5/5).

We therefore rank ourself 4.33/5 on the Free appropriation criteria of the TILIOS framework. 

**24. Emancipation through doing criteria**
We build self-sustenance (3/5) and technological sovereignety (4/5).

We therefore rank ourself 3.5/5 on the Emancipation through doing criteria of the TILIOS framework. 

**25. Resilience and modularity criteria**
We believe that the transition will also be played locally (3/5), prefer collaboration to competition (3/5) and are fairly resilient (3/5).

We therefore rank ourself 3/5 on the Resilience and modularity criteria of the TILIOS framework. 

---

### Real life examples
#### A personalised digital platform, cognitive load and time well spent.

Oriane is passionate about recycling and creates a side project to use bio-waste material to create a product that could replace plastics. She finds that she needs some help with her project management and also needs some legal/financial advice to proceed. However, her full-time job leaves her little spare time. She isn't enthusiastic about surfing the Internet late at night for research but having recently attended a peer-to-peer training class, she logins to a new personalised dashboard. She immediately sees information regarding her project through an auto-curated information feed made up of a combination of integrated digital tools and an active community of peers who she previously tagged when starting her project. By using her new personalised dashboard for a mere 20 minutes in one evening, she saved herself from an exhaustive and solitary search for pertinent information, as well as, the ability to meet like-minded people and experts.

#### It's as simple as exercise and sleep, realising ones' personal responsibility.

Baptiste is an avid rock climber and yoga practitioner. He sees his friend and colleague, David, looking more tired and has also been a little more quiet than usual. David has confided in Beptiste that he isn't sleeping or eating well at the moment. Concerned, Baptiste takes David aside and asks him if he is alright. David admits that he has some stress at the moment due to an unfinished project deadline and that he is also arguing a lot with his girlfriend. Baptiste invites David to dinner for a home cooked meal and proposes they meet again the next night for a rock climbing session. David soon feels better after a few visits to the gym, and starts to realise that his social interactions in general are becoming more relaxed and that the fighting with his girlfriend has also ceased. He even notices that his friends are happier seeing him more well rested and healthier. Weeks later, David starts sleeping better and soon finishes his project with more clarity and calm. He realises that his responsibility to his friends is directly correlated to his own well-being, and vice versa.

#### Being equipped for growth; the importance of access and learning opportunities in a community.

Françoise is a newcomer to a co-repair association in the city. She really loves the idea that she can learn how to repair her broken appliances with others while having access to tools and workshop space each week. Her frequent attendance also means that she is growing closer to a diverse social network that has taken the effort to welcome her and support her growing knowledge base. A few months later, Françoise is doing an internship with the association and is learning how to budget and track inventory through selected digital tools and peer-to-peer training. She can now repair most items independently and has started organising co-repair events in people's homes by using a dedicated, open source digital platform conceived by the community.

#### Finding the right balance between interpersonal interactions and contributions.

Claire co-founded a new food co-operative with Benjamin. Both are deeply involved in building the commons, in promoting open source inspired practices and just caring deeply about human connections in general. However they have one particular subject that they cannot seem to agree on. Claire is weary about certain people in the community who do not pull their weight. She doesn't want to exclude anyone but feels that these people are not being fair to those who contribute more time and effort. She is conflicted but wants to promote fairness in the community. Benjamin understands her concerns and holds another perspective. He feels that any contribution has value and that even if some are more passive in nature, they still provide the community something positive, and notably, means of unexpected surprises like transmission or the exposure to an extended community network. By introducing an adapted and enforced reciprocity agreement into the community, each contract can valorise specifically the strengths of each contribution and put into value components that are needed to make them more meaningful and useful.

---

### References links
* [Our governance design planning notes](https://pad.lamyne.org/design_de_gouvernance?both)
* [Social code - via Virtual Assembly, developing the commons in transition](https://www.virtual-assembly.org/code-social/)
* [TILIOS - Tiers-Lieux Libres et Open Source](http://tiers-lieux.org/)

---
